initial dev doc (#10776)
kgateway-dev/kgateway: DEV.md

Architecture:

KGateway is a control plane for envoy based on the gateway-api. This means that we translate K8s objects like Gateways, HttpRoutes, Service, EndpointSlices and User policy into envoy configuration.

Our goals with the architecture of the project are to make it scalable and extendable.

> To make the project scalable, its importnat to keep the computation minimal when changes occur. For example, when a pod changes, or a policy is updated, we don't do the minimum amount of computation to update the envoy configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the project scalable, it's important to keep the computation minimal when changes occur. For example, when a pod changes, or a policy is updated, we do the minimum amount of computation to update the envoy configuration.
```
it says "we don't do the minimum amount" .. assume it should say "we do"?

- Automatically track object dependencies and changes and only invoke logic that depends on the object that changed.

# CRD Journey
How does a user CRD make it into envoy?

We have 3 main translation lifecycles: Routes & Listeners, Clusters and Endpoints.

Let's focus on the first one - Routes and Listeners, as this is where the majority of the logic is.

Envoy Routes & Listeners translate from Gateways, HttpRoutes, and user policies (i.e. RoutePolicy, ListenerPolicy, etc).

## Policies
The first step is to convert each user policy into an IR form. This is done by creating a collection of these objects from k8s, and transforming the collection to an IR representation.

For policies, this is pluggable. Plugins can Contribute a policy to kgateway. Contributing a policy means that we add a policy collection to  kgateway. It's the users plugin responsibility to convert the policy CRD to the IR form. Ideally, the IR should look as close as possible to the envoy configuration, so this translation only happens when the policy CRD changes.

You can see in the Plugin interface a field called `ContributesPolicies` which is a map of GK -> `PolicyPlugin`.

> The policy plugin contains a bunch of fields, but for out discussion we'll focus on these two:

Reviewer 2: s/out/our/

I agree that not all fields should be discussed here but it will be helpful to improvise the godocs throughout, especially for `internal/kgateway/extensions2/plugin/plugin.go` and IR types.

```go
type PolicyPlugin struct {
	Policies       krt.Collection[ir.PolicyWrapper]
	NewGatewayTranslationPass func(ctx context.Context, tctx ir.GwTranslationCtx) ir.ProxyTranslationPass
    // ... other fields
}
```
Policies is a the collection of policies that the plugin contributes. The plugin is responsible to create

> this collection, usually by started with a CRD collection, and then translating to a `ir.PolicyWrapper` struct.

Reviewer 2: s/started/starting/

Lets look at the important fields in the PolicyWrapper:

```go
type PolicyWrapper struct {
	// The Group, Kind Name, Namespace to the original policy object
	ObjectSource `json:",inline"`
	// The IR of the policy objects. ideally with structural errors removed.
	// Opaque to us other than metadata.
	PolicyIR PolicyIR
	// Where to attach the policy. This usually comes from the policy CRD.
	TargetRefs []PolicyTargetRef
}
```

The system will make use of the traget refs to attach the policy IR to Listners and HttpRoutes. You will then 
get access to the IR during translation (more on that later).

> The second field, `NewGatewayTranslationPass` allocates a new translation state for the

Reviewer: what's the lifecycle of the plugin (i.e. when does NewPlugin get called) vs. the translation pass?

Author: good point - NewPlugin is called just once; i'll update

gateway/route translation. This function will be invoked during the Translation to xDS phase, so will expand on it later.

## HttpRotues and Gateways

HttpRoutes and Gateways are handled by KGateway. Kgateway builds an IR for HttpRoutes and Gateways, that looks very similar to 
the original object, but in additional has an `AttachedPolicies` struct that contains all the policies that are attached to the object.

> KGateway uses the `TargetRefs` field in the PolicyWrapper to opaquely attach the policy to the HttpRoute or Gateway.

Reviewer: should we mention extensionRef too?

## Translation to xDS

> When we reach this phase, we already ahve the Policy -> IR translation done; and we have all the HttpRoutes and Gateways in IR form with the policies attached to them.

Reviewer 2: s/ahve/have/

> When we reach this phase, we already ahve the Policy -> IR translation done; and we have all the HttpRoutes and Gateways in IR form with the policies attached to them.

Reviewer: maybe we should group the 2 phases as sub-headings in this doc: 1) policy -> IR translation (when NewPlugin is called?), 2) IR to xDS (when the ApplyFor* funcs are called)

Author: the `policy -> IR translation` happens earlier; i'll expand on it in the earlier section
